I am Mansa Musa. Born in 1280 in Mali. I am the
fourteenth century emperor of the Mali Empire.
My empire stretched across two thousand miles from
the Atlantic Ocean to Lake Chad and which included
all or parts of the modern nations of Mauritania,
Senegal, Gambia, Guinea, Burkina Faso, Mali,
Niger, Nigeria, and Chad, ensured decades of peace
and prosperity in Western Africa. During my reign,
Mali was one of Africa's richest nations, and I
was among the richest individuals in the world.
In 1312 I became emperor following the death of
my predecessor, Abu-Bakr the second. I was given
the name Mansa meaning king. I worked thoroughly
to expand internal and external trade. I became
the first Muslim ruler in West Africa to make
the nearly four-thousand-mile journey to Mecca.
Preparing for the expedition
took years and involved the
work of artisans in numerous
towns and cities across Mali.
In 1324, accompanied by thousands of richly
dressed servants and supporters, I made generous
gold donations to the poor and to charitable
organizations as well as the rulers of the
lands my entourage crossed. My donations caused
a brief decline in gold value for a few years.
Upon my return from Mecca, I invited
Arab scholars, government bureaucrats,
and architects. They introduced advanced building
techniques and structures to Mali such as the
mosque at Gao and the still-standing great mosque
at Timbuktu, the largest city in the empire.
My pilgrimage boosted Islamic education in
Mali by adding libraries and universities.
Timbuktu become one of the leading cities
in the Islamic world during the time when
the most advanced nations from Spain to central
India were Muslim. My journey sparked Italian,
German, and Spanish cartographers to produce maps
referring to me and my empire. The first of these
maps appeared in Italy in 1339 with my name.
I died in 1337 after a twenty-five-year reign
leaving a robust government that lasted
for many prosperous years. I hope fortunate
people are still sharing their wealth with the
needy as this is what makes us live in peace.